Let's talk a little bit
about space toggles.
So that's kind of a strange name,
space toggles.
What does that mean?
Space toggles allow us to turn
parts of a value on and off.
It's a technique some would say a hack I
agree it's a hack but it's quite useful.
So let's see how these work again
we have the same two lines of code
you're used to that now and then effects
and color is set to an empty value.
What do we get?
We get the full back the empty value is
basically treated the same as initial.
Until recently,
it was actually a part time error, but
we changed that behavior very recently.
It doesn't make a difference in the actual
output because when it was a part time
error it was as if accent color
was not specified at all.
So we still got the full back.
Now what if actual color
is set to just whitespace?
What do we get then?
We get transparent.
We actually get transparent in the same
way that we get transparent when we
specify 42 degrees.
Because whitespace is an invalid value for
background.
What does background
white space mean nothing.
So it becomes invalid
at computed value time.
And thus, we get the background's initial
value, but what happens in this case?
So here, if accent color is
said to the empty string,
well, if it said to an empty value.
Then we get the full back orange.
So we get a gradient from
white to transparent and
that is thrown over orange.
Now what happens if accent color
is set to the to whitespace.
If accent color is set to whitespace
then when it's substituted we
still get a valid value for background.
We just get the linear gradient
from white to transparent.
So we still get a value,
it's just a part of it has been turned off
Whitespace is a perfectly valid value for
custom property.
If the second declaration is not invalid,
it looks invalid to many people,
but it's actually perfectly fine.
It's perfectly fine to have
whitespace as a value.
It's whether the resulting value is
going to be valid after the custom
property has been substituted
at the point of usage.
That depends on what we have,
what value we have for
our property after all these
whitespaces have been substituted.
So whitespace is perfectly valid and
very useful in turning parts
of a value off and on.
It can also be used as a fallback, and
it can also be useful as a fallback.
So we want to add an inset
property as well to control
whether the shadow is inset or not.
So we would start by going
to the main role and
resetting it to initial
to cancel inheritance.
So it would be book shadow
inset in a show, and
then we would go here to reference it but
now all the shadows disappeared.
That's because it's not actually set.
While we could go here and do insert, or
nothing even we could even
set it to whitespace.
We don't wanna have to set it every
time we use these long hands of shorts.
So what do we do?
We just specify whitespace as
the fallback, and then it works just fine.
It just turns this part of
the value off if we don't need it.
So whitespace is perfectly useful as a
fallback as well not just as the value of
the property.
Now let's look at a slightly
more practical example.
So here we have two variations of this
button, one that is completely flat,
and one that has a subtle gradient
over it that we call shiny.
And right now we have to apply
a class to apply this gradient,
which is not very practical.
We don't wanna be adding and
removing classes to our HTML just
to change the style of a button.
It would be nice if we
could just summon this
shininess straight from
the CSS wouldn't it.
What if we could do like
is shiny with some sort of
value here that turns the shyness off and
on.
Well, we can actually do that.
This gradient that we have here,
it can just be the full back of
this value of this property.
So we can do var is shiny
with the entire gradient As
the fallback and now what happens.
If it's shiny is initial,
we get the full back,
if it's whitespace,
we just get whitespace.
And this means we can
even combine these right
here because we can just
turn the gradient off and
on so whitespace no shininess.
Initial, we get shininess.
Let's try this from
an inline style as well.
Because right now we're
still using this class.
We can go here and specify initial for
is shiny and
we would need to specify a base of
Whitespace because we don't want it
to be active on the regular button.
And notice that now,
we can alternate between
these values to turn the subtle
gradient on and off.
However, the counterpoint to this is,
this makes no sense to
anybody looking at my code.
I don't wanna have to explain
this to any other developer.
This is awful.
Like having to specify
initial to turn things on,
and whitespace to turn them off,
good luck explaining that to
my colleagues and I agree.
Indeed this is very confusing.
But there are ways to
make it easier to read.
We can define aliases like ON and OFF.
And ON can be initial since
that's what turns the value on.
So, here, we can come and
say, is shiny is off.
So the base button has
shininess turned off.
And then if we wanna turn it on,
we do this and
nobody has to care how
this actually works.
They just use these on and off keywords.
And now despite this might be
a little more palatable and
it's actually kind of
easy to read I find it.
And obviously here it just turning
one part of one value on and
off but we could do an entire variations.
Essentially this allows us to
emulate a lot of types of mixins.
If you look at the notes,
I have a link to an article of mine
that has a more elaborate use case for
styling this button.
So the takeaway here is that you can turn
off multiple different parts have custom
properties in one go with whitespace and
this is called space toggle.